Hey friends. I want to
thank our sponsors. And I
want you to know that
putting together a show like
Hansel minutes takes a lot
of time, a lot of
effort, a lot of editing,
a website to manage a
lot of bandwidth. And without
our sponsors, we couldn't make
it happen. So first I
want to thank Reagan. Reagan
provides full stack error, crash,
and performance monitoring for tech
teams. Whether you're a software
engineer who is looking to
diagnose and resolve issues with
greater speed and accuracy or
a product manager, who's drowning
in bug reports, or you're
just concerned that you're losing
customers to poor quality online
experiences. Raygun can provide you
with the answers you get
full stack error and performance
monitoring in one place. So
the next time you're struggling
to replicate errors and performance
issues and your code base
think Raygun head over to
reagan.com. That's our a Y
G U n.com. You can
get up and running in
minutes and you can dramatically
improve the online experiences of
your users. Hi, This is
Scott Hanselman. This is another
episode of Hansel minutes. And
today I have the distinct
pleasure of chatting with star
Trek, visual effects, master Dan
Curry. How are you, sir?
Very well. Thank you. How
about yourself? I'm very well
and thrilled to be chatting
with you. Although I must
say looking at your, your
accolades and online, I could
probably spend about five or
10 minutes doing just an
intro of you and all
the stuff that you've done
over the years. It's quite
a career you've had. Well,
it's kept me from stealing
a shopping cart and moving
under a bridge. You ha
you were involved in, in
star Trek for what now?
Eight you're 18 years and
18 years. And that's a
very small number of people
who were in the 18
year club working on four
different shows. I think it
was maybe around 10 give
or take a monitor two
on either side, but it
wasn't a lot of people,
the things that you were
in charge of very do
you get everything from visual
effects to title creation, you
even worked on star Trek
for the movie. That is
correct. And do you also
did second unit director work
is how, why do you
have such a diverse background?
Did they, did they just
say, Oh, let Dan do
it. He'll do a great
job. Or is this typical?
Well, it's not visual effects.
People frequently do a second
unit directing because the shots
are so tactical sometimes where
say the regular episodic director
doesn't have the time to
spend four hours on a
given shot. They're racing to
get their day done. And
they may not necessarily have
the, the expertise or even
the patients sometimes to do
these shots said may require
various elements. And especially you
shooting people in front of
green screen or their explosions.
So it takes a long
time. So that's why Frequently
the second unit director is
the visual effects supervisor. And
other times sometimes if it's
a stunt thing and the
second unit director is that
the stunt coordinator. Oh, okay.
So given that you are
the one who's helping coordinate
the building of the props
and the creation of the
effects, the you're uniquely set
to be the second unit
director, if those are the
shots that have all of
those effects. Well, yeah. And
the thing is that my
background is in filmmaking. I
have an MFA and at
both film and theater and
years ago, when I got
out of the peace Corps
in Thailand, I worked for
the Thai department of education
and directed a weekly Thai
language educational series. Oh, wow.
That sounds like a fantastic
way to, to, is that
what this beginning of your
career to start your career
though? Well, it was a
great experience in Thailand, but
I've been making movies since
I was very young. I
went after seeing the beast
from 20,000 fathoms and reading
about how they, they did
that. Ray Harryhausen, the, the
genius did a lot of
things for three or projection.
So I had a broken
eight millimeter movie projectors. So
I taped some tracing paper
inside a cardboard box. And,
but my broken projector on
one side and shot movies
of my brother's screaming and
then put a toy dinosaur
it's lumbering around in the
foreground. So that was a
beginning of my visual effects
career. And, and Ray, Harry
has an a in fact,
the, kind of the creator
of a stop motion form
of animation known as DynaMesh
and one of the early
stop motion experts and innovators.
Yeah. And the influence of
Ray on the, on the
film industry, he can't be
underestimated that he, he was
a very important figure, but
then again, Ray owes Willis,
O'Brien a homage to, because
Willis doing the first King
Kong and the silent version
of lost continent Willis was
the real pioneer Indeed working
with Willis on things like
mighty Joe Young and the, you
know, some of the early
color films in the late
in the late forties. Ah,
that's true. Yeah. So one
of the things that I
think is interesting about the
fact that you of course
brought up, you know, Harryhausen,
is there, wasn't a lot
of visual effects cause there
wasn't any CGI. And one
of the things that I
think people appreciate about star
Trek over the years is
the balance between practical effects
and high quality sets and,
and props and you know,
not being heavy handed with
the graphics. Well, there was
a, there were all those
visual effects. They were not,
they were just not done
on the computer. They were
done either in camera or
using optical printing for compositing.
And one of the great
things about the star Trek
franchise is that it mirror
the evolution of visual effects
technology. When we started next
generation, everything was done photographically
with the exception of compositing.
And it was one of
the courageous decisions by paramount
to issue optical printer, compositing,
to result in a film
negative as a final product
and do it with a,
with a video compositing. And
early on, we were doing
one inch analog compositing, and
then as D one came
along or D five, rather
than we moved up to
true digital compositing. But early
on, we were still doing
matte paintings in oils and
physical models on motion control
rigs to make the, do
the space scenes. And then
right after the end of
star Trek, deep space nine,
we were getting into CG
because the demands of the
shows were so great. We
didn't have time to shoot
physical models and get done
in time. So we did
some hybrid shows early on
where the foreground ships were
physical models, but the background
ships were CG and early
on the CG models didn't
look quite as, as real,
there were artifacts of stretching,
skins around three G wireframes
and stuff. But by the
time we got to star
Trek, enterprise CG ad had
a level of a verisimilitude
that made sense. And enterprise
was the first all CG
star Trek show. Oh wow.
Do people in the business
in yourself and your compatriots,
did you get a little
sad or wistful or when
you, when you move from
physical models to CG or
do you say, Oh, this
just lets us do our
job that much more effectively.
There's always a little of
both. There's a, every technological
innovation is a two edged
sword and doing things early
on. It was a lot
of say visual equivalent of
medieval alchemy. How can we
make something look like something
it's not, there was one
episode in next generation, arsenal
of freedom where we had
a drone, satellite was supposed
to reenter the atmosphere and
burn up. And of course
we couldn't do that. So
I had the idea of
glowing slivers of plastic bag
onto a model covered with
black flocking and photographing it
with electric fans, causing the,
the streamers to blow around.
And by keeping the shutter
open for three seconds of
frame, it created this motion
blur that looked like hot
gases coming off the model.
And then by using that
as a, a window or
a King element, we printed
real fire through that. And
it looked like the reentry
heat of something entering an
atmosphere. Oh, wow. Did you
did know this or did
You have an Intuit that
this might work? We intuited,
we, we had, we were,
it was a sprint doing
star Trek because we were
expected to do half a
feature every few weeks. So
we would have a guess
on how to do something.
And based on experience and
despair can be the mother
of invention, but mostly it
was just intuitive guessing that
this would probably work. And
sometimes we would grit our
teeth and live with something
we were not really happy
with. And not the times
we were delighted with how
well it came out. It's
interesting that you brought up
that particular episode, given how
many episodes you worked on,
because one of the devices,
one of the drones, the
echo pop echo, Popa drones,
echo Papa drums from the
arsenal of freedom is actually
up for auction. And a
lot of your collections, some
of the props and things
that you've collected over the
last 18 years are up
at heritage auctions. And we'll
have a link for that
in the show notes where
people can go to entertainment
dot  dot com, and
we'll put you directly to
the sets later this week.
And that means literally this
week of the second week
of April, I believe the
auction starts on the 15th of April.
You can see these props.
And in fact, this one,
this echo Papa atmosphere and
that pronounced echo Popa drone
is up there. This is
something you collected and just,
you just walk away off
the set with these things.
No, no, no. I actually
made it and no one
walked away off the set
that would not be too
ethical. It was just a
wound up with it. And
that when we were done
that was either throw it
in the dumpster or keep
it in it because I
made it myself. I thought
it would be just something
cool to have around. And
over the years I just
wound up with too much
stuff. So we're trying to
minimalize our material possessions, and
I thought it would be
good to share some of
these objects with the fans
that are interested. Yeah, that's
fantastic. And in fact, there
were a number of drones
that were created to, and
one of them of course,
went into the atmosphere and,
and had that effect that
you just described. That's correct.
That's one of them. And
then the, the one we
saw on the planet surfaces
there. And interestingly enough, in
that episode, we had a
jungle set built on stage
at paramount. And there was
an earlier design that looked
like a three pronged cloth
flying around. That was very
heavy. The initial idea was
to shoot it practically, and
it was too heavy to
run on wires. It was
too heavy to carry and
the claws kept snagging in
the branches of the jungle.
So the producers came to
me and said, let's figure
something out at the last
minute. So I took a
plastic, Easter egg and glued
a shampoo bottle on it
with some little tube to
hide that normally it's used
to hide cables and then
glued a legs pantyhose container
on the bottom and use
blue demo label tape for
ports on the little drone
robot and then shot it
in front of a green
screen. And so the blue
allowed me to pull a
key from just the ports
on the, on the device.
And then the green gave
us an overall mat. And
the other thing that was
different about that, everybody thought
I was crazy. I decided
not to shoot the, a
model drone with a motion
control. Oh wow. Which would
have taken a long time.
And I, I just felt
sometimes motion control is too
perfect and too time consuming.
And since the thing was
supposed to flutter around and
react to the branches in
the jungle, what I decided
to do is I put
it upside down on the
end of a pole, put
on a, an embarrassing green
suit and stood in front
of a green screen. And
by that time I'd done
Tai Chi for about 20
years. So I learned how
to move slowly and with
as much grace as my
clumsiness can muster. And so
all the motions of that
drone robot were actually done
by hand by me carrying
it on a pole That
is unbelievable. You can, I
actually have a link in
the show notes to the,
that segment of the, of
that episode, episode 21 of
season one. And you won't
believe it. You won't believe
a number of things you're
describing assembling this, this, this
drone out of plastics and,
and what you had available
to you. But when you
see it on screen, it's
almost impossible to believe it
looks amazing. And if you
look at the pictures that
we'll link to up on
the, the heritage auction site,
you'll agree that it's, it's,
it's almost impossible as a
layman to hear you describe
Oh yeah. And I took
a, you know, a Hanes
pantyhose egg, and that, you
know, it just seemed like
a good idea at the
time. And it still looks
like a million bucks on,
on the screen. Oh, I
also painted it. And when
I do something like that,
I do a, a base
coat of gray and then
I just airbrushed it. So
it would look metallic and
did very subtle color differences
where they were a little
bit of blue, a little
bit of a magenta and
those color variations make it
look very for a reflective
and metallic. And I, that
was the key with, with,
with that one as to
the paint job on it.
And also I was looking
for something elegant and there's
something wonderful and found objects
that I guess for me,
it's instinctive, I can look
at things independent of their
original purpose and their scale.
So say if I go
to a hardware store and
look in the plumbing section,
there might be a little
sleeve to use as a,
to repair underground sprinklers and
I up using that as
The core body for a
space, a lifeboat. Wow. Hey,
this is Scott. Just jumping
in for a quick message
from our sponsors. They make
this show possible. Are you
looking to build real time,
contact data, validation, and enrichment
into your applications? Check out
Melissa's developer portal, you'll gain
easy access to flexible APIs
for global address verification, phone,
IP address, email and property
and business data sample code,
and get post methods, technical
documentation. It's all included and
quick online payment makes rapid
application development, easy visit melissa.com/developer.
That's Mel I S S
a.com/developer, or just call one
800. Melissa is painting such
like the most important skill
because it's such a multimodal
and diverse set of skills.
One needs like the ability
to airbrush something and to
know how light hits any
surface, even a plastic surface
and make plastic look like
metal. This is it all
come down to painting. No
it lighting. Painting is one
factor lighting as the other,
how it moves is another
issue. And that that's one
of the things that makes
film and television such a
wonderful art form because it's
the combination of all art
forms and dance in a
way like in the way
I moved the drone robot,
basically as dance or the
way a great camera operator
moves is also a form
of dance. And so you
have painting sculpture and with
models, it's sculpture and the
great bottle makers like Greg
Jean and Tony manager, and
some of the others we
worked with those guys are
true artists and they're great
sculptors, but they're also technically
on top of what they're
doing. So they know how
to hold light back, how
to do wiring, how to
make parts move. So the
other hero, geniuses of star
Trek, where, where the model
makers, who, who built the
hero models like the enterprise
deep space, nine Voyager, those
guys were amazing and, and
deserve the abiding respect to
fans. I'm looking at one
of the lots that's up
called the, the worker bee
shuttle craft that was used
in star Trek, the next
generation. And fortunately the images
online here are extremely high
resolution. So I can basically
get my face right up
to it much closer than,
than one would ordinarily get
to such a thing. And
when you get close to
it, you can, you can
see where things were glued
and where hot glue was
used. And what's an led
and what's not so one,
and by no means, do
I mean to diminish the
work, but when one gets
abnormally close to one of
these things, the illusion is
gone and you can see
that like one of the
naysayer calls is a Gillette
razor handle, but if you
simply move a foot away,
that illusion disappears and they'll
suddenly you're really looking at
a spaceship and it looked
amazing on screen. Well, that
another one that it's some
of the old guard, visual
effects guys would call it
the joke or the gag,
because it's, it's a form
of prestidigitation. And so in
that case, I knew we
would never get that close
to it. And I used
it only when enterprise was
in dry dock and I
borrowed a broken robot foot
from my son's toy bin
and blew those razors on
it. And a couple of
other parts, and my colleague,
Gary, Hutzel wired it up
with the led lights and,
and that was it. And,
but by, by knowing that
we wouldn't get too close
to it and, and making
sure that there were enough
interesting surface details to catch
light and make moving shadows.
That's what gives it, that
feeling of verisimilitude in context,
because people see it go
by, but they're really looking
at the enterprise and looking
at the grand scope of
the, the whole dry dock
situation. Yeah, exactly. That holistic,
it's not just a, a
model close up in the
stark, bright white lights of
the, of the internet. It's
everything in whole with light
and sound and motion. Yeah.
It's context. And it is
Context. Absolutely. Some of the
things that are up here
on the auction are amazing.
The Voyager Borg city, some
concepts sculptures are the concepts,
cultures not used in the
show, but rather used to
model a CGI effects. Exactly.
Sometimes whether it's people in
the art department or myself
would do drawings for what
we had in mind. And
of course the producers would
have to approve them. But
in case of certain things
that are very, very complicated,
a drawing would be very
difficult and to interpret. So
I went into my, I
have a modest woodshop at
home. So I went in
and started, started with a
cube and then built out
for it, thinking about how
the Borg sink that they
are eminently pragmatic, and they
don't make artistic design decisions.
See the shape of objects
is form follows function. And
so as the Borg city
expanded, they'd keep adding on
and adding on like an
endless housing development and they
just build something that they
needed. So I approached creating
that, that conceptual model, that
way, here's a cube, Oh,
well now they need a
little thing that does this
kind of work. Now they
have a science lab over
here. And so I just
built it intuitively and then
painted up. And that made
it a lot easier for
the CG artists to build
that city because they could
walk around and look at
it from different, different sides.
And so I explained, well,
let's assume that this cube
is a kilometer and a
half on each side. And
then it just goes on
for hundreds of miles and
they, so they, they got
it immediately and did, of
course their usual brilliant job.
Fantastic. It's the sculptural equivalent
of a rough sketch. And
you say, look, look at,
make it like this. That's
exactly right. It's a sculptural
equivalent of rough sketch and
a hot glue is something
that's a great tool for
that because you can glue
stuff together very instantly and
work fast. And then I
went back and reinforced everything
with the poxy at all
the joints. Oh wow. And
now it's, of course, as
it's being auctioned off, it
is mounted on a nice,
on a nice plate and
felt covered wood base and
would look great certainly on
my, on my mantle or
someone's manual. Well, I would
hope so. And know, my,
my goal is that these
things shouldn't be buried in
my garage or my storage
unit. They should be in
the hands of people that,
that that's the work of
any artist. They want people
to own them and appreciate
them for what they are.
Yeah, indeed. One of the
things that I was interested
in is not just creating
a, certainly not just creating
effects, but conceiving of things
that are now somewhat iconic.
You created the battle with
cling on sword and the,
the KLS, his sword from
deep space nine is actually
part of this auction as
well. How does that come
about as a writer conceive
of like, ah, the Klingons
got a mean looking knife,
and then you take it
from there. Or how does
that, How that came about
was we had an episode
of TNG where WARF was
to inherit a primordial Klingon
bladed weapon. And the first
idea that came down was
a, something that looked like
a Pirate's Cutlass. And I
looked at it and, and
it had a couple of
flanges on it. And even
as a, as a boy,
I didn't like movie weapons
that were designed to look
cool, but weren't, and, and
that's a disparity of original
design, but, and I had
been imagining what became the
bat left for a long
time, but never had any
reason to bring it into
existence. So I made one
out of foam core and
went into the producer's office
and said, Hey, let's do
something that's never existed before.
So they, the claimants have
something unique to their culture,
but it also is ergonomically
sound as a weapon. So,
and then I said, I
can make up a whole
series of moves for this.
And the producers looked at
it and said, cool, let's
do it. So then I
got the chance to, with
our wonderful stunt coordinator, Dennis
Madeline, who had first had
a grim opinion of it
until I said, well, look,
Dennis, we can do this
and this and this. And
suddenly he became a very
excited about it. And then
as in one of the
other stunt guys, Tommy Morga
became real masters of, of
using the bat left. So
when it came time to
going back to the bat
left, it's the, the Korean
martial arts association approved as
one of the first new
bladed weapon in 200 years,
that has practical value. And
even the Navy department of
research contacted me and wanted
to talk to me about
my ideas about a weapon
ergonomics. And when it came
time on deep space sign
from the sort of Kayla's
house Kayla's being the quintessential
cling on warrior. And I
always just imagined KLS has
been something like the great
Irish warrior, who Colin from
a Caltech history. And so
I thought, well, Kayla should
have something like the bat
left, but it should be
more vicious and more Baroque
because of the intensity of
violence in his time period.
So I had this idea
of doing this central spike
in the middle for, I
call it a disempowerment flange
and other flanges on the
weapon. So you can grapple
an opponent's weapon and inflict
harm on your opponent and
in even greater variety of
ways. My goodness. And this
is become such a thing
though over the last, you
know, many years that you
can find sword makers and
blacksmiths who will take creating
a, a bat left as
a, as a tool to
make it and to create
it and then to do
a video about it As
a challenge. Yeah. What's also
is interesting is how many
people claim they invented it,
Which is interesting given that,
that you created the original
prop that was used, and
then only two were made
one for an exhibit and
one for your own collection,
which is now being auctioned
off. Yeah, that was the
one that, that was my
compensation for helping provide stuff
to the Las Vegas star
Trek experience. So when Gill
had been, who was one
of America's national treasures, he's
a great knife, Baker knife,
throwing hall of fame, and
also a master of the
rhythm bones, a neolithic instrument,
kind of like casting and
nets. And so Gil made
the one for Las Vegas
and they made it, he
made a second one for
me as, as a favor
Indeed. And he also created
the knife in Rambo. So
he'll get a master knife
Maker and the Expendables. And
if you look up Gil
Hibbing online, he does these
incredible fantasy knives that are
beautiful works of art. Yeah.
I'm going to include links
to all of this in
the show notes. So given
length of your career and
the depth and breadth of
the things that you worked
on, I'm curious now that
we've got social media and
everyone online and the rise
of cosplay, what do you
feel about watching different amateur
cause players create their props
out of foam core and
techniques that you and your,
your compatriots started with? I
think it's cool. It's very
flattering to see so many
people be inspired and want
to do that. And, and
I sometimes get videos of
P from people showing how
they come up with their
own kata or form to
use the bat left, and
then I'll give them advice
and tend to advise them
not to use them as
choppers, but there should be
much more a fluid kind
of a Tai Chi like
motion so that when you're
using a heavy weapon, you
really wind up getting its
momentum going and guiding it
rather than using it as
a Vegomatic chopper. Yeah, indeed.
It's meant to be a
weapon, but an elegant weapon,
not a, not a sloppy
weapon, I would hope so.
Yeah. And it sounds like
your, your expertise in Tai
Chi and martial arts informed
a lot of the work
that you did. Yeah. And
I think weapons, it's something
I've always been interested in
as a, as a boy
watching medieval movies and movies
set in ancient times. So
weapons always fascinated me and
star Trek gave me a
wonderful home where a lot
of my goofy skills actually
had value. I'm curious. Do
you think that this is
going to become a lost
art, that creation of more
practical effects of physical props
and miniatures? Or do you
think that we are still
in the golden age of
creating these kinds of effects?
Well, there will always be
physical props because actors need
to interact with them and
hold them and use them.
And it's going to ebb
and flow the wonderful aspect
of CG. And certainly at
it's evolved to an incredible
art form. Is that anything
we can imagine is now
a doable in a very
convincing way. And so as
resolution gets greater and greater
and computing power gets greater
and greater CG is still
in its, in its infancy.
And it's, and I just
think as future generations evolve
the art form, it's just
going to get better and
better. And you look at
some of the great tent
pole films that are coming
out, and you know that
with the hundreds of million
dollar budgets, the, the work
done in terms of water,
simulation and rain and so
forth, it's a, it's truly
remarkable what can be accomplished.
Yeah, indeed. It does feel
though sometimes that the, the,
at least the American movie
audience somehow gets jaded and
they say, Oh, you know,
transformers are just a mess,
a CG and robots bashing.
I couldn't tell what was
going on on screen. There's
too much. So there's too
much CG That can happen.
At some point, I would
kind of argue with that
a little bit. It's basically
the vision, the vision of
the filmmaker. That's like a,
the King of Sweden telling
Mozart, there are too many
notes in your piece of
music. I think what happens,
it's not so much an
issue of too much CG,
but the existing for its
own stake in dominating the
story. And ultimately people want
to be told stories that
have some revelation about the
human condition. That is a
valid point. And indeed ultimately
using transformers as the, as
the whipping boy in this
example is this is the
vision of the, of the
director. And certainly the visual
effects team gave him exactly
what he asked for. That's
true because the visual effects
team, a division of the,
of the director or in
television, more importantly, it's the
producers that are the creative
through line because they're different
directors for most episodes, so
that the creative consistency comes
from the producers who supervise
and maintain a stylist to
consistency and thematic consistency in,
in a, in a given
show deed. Well, thank you
so much for chatting with
me today. Oh, thank you.
It was a very enjoyable,
I wish you all the
best of luck on your
April 15th, 2008 auction at heritage auctions.
And I would encourage folks
that are listening to the
show to take a look
at the show notes. We'll
include links to all the
different lots and also information
and links that Dan and
I chatted with. This has
been another episode of Hansel
minutes. And we'll see you
again next week. .